uh thanks so much uh Mark for that nice
introduction and it sounds like the
microphone is working yes you can all
hear me great yeah thanks uh as you said
for coming out tonight hopefully this
will be a fun talk um as you said I work
on the the tools and compilers team at
Jan Street and uh the particular the
particular sub team that I work on is
called the okam language team and we
work out a bunch of different things we
build uh the core libraries that Jane
Street uses and open sources uh we work
on tools for things like refactoring
code and pre-processing code uh but the
thing that I'm going to talk about today
is our work on the OK programming
language itself uh I think oaml is a
great language for many purposes
including writing high performance
software and if you go on YouTube you
can find lots of talks of people from
Jane Street explaining why we think it's
a great programming language um but
today I'm going to talk about the flip
side of that a little bit some of the
things we think could be better about
okel and and the ways that we're trying
to make it
better uh okay so before I dive into
uh uh you know the details of the of the
extensions we're building I want to sort
of put us on a Level Playing Field I
assume not everybody here is an O camel
expert so I'm going to talk a little bit
uh for the first third of the talk or so
about uh how o camel works today uh and
why some of those things are maybe
suboptimal for some of jam Street's use
cases and then uh after we get through
that I'll I'll cover the ways that we're
trying to make it
better okay let's dive in so I'm going
to start with a a pretty low-level
detail about o camel uh which is the way
it represents values in memory and this
is a this is a fact about oaml um that
uh you know most okel programmers don't
really have to think about in their
day-to-day programming but if you're
writing really high performance
applications you do have to think about
this fact uh and so okl has what's
called a uniform representation of
values so every value in O Cel program
is represented exactly the same way
they're all onew wide and that word is
either an immediate with the data packed
right into that word or it's a pointer
to a block on the Heap uh containing the
data uh that your value
represents so um immediates uh are
anything that fits in a machine word
actually anything that fits in 63 bits
will represented as immediate and if
your type is 63 bits or less then I will
pack it into the first 63 bits of a word
and we'll make the last bit one to mark
this as that immediate type uh so things
like integers characters and booleans
represented this way in O camel um on
the other hand if your data doesn't fit
into 63 bits then we represents it as a
pointer to a block on the Heap and this
block has a uniform layout it starts
with a header word that explains how big
the block is for
example um and then it has a word for
every value contained in that block so
for example record would be represented
this way and would have one subword for
each field of the
record um so so this is really cool
every every value in oel is represented
as as just one word either an immediate
or a pointer um and this is really
useful for the for the garbage collector
among other things um why is it useful
for the garbage collector well oaml is a
garbage collected language and so the
garbage collector has to like scan all
the data associated with your program
and this uniform representation of
values makes that really easy the
garbage collector can just look at any
okal value and it knows it's going to be
one word wide and that if it ends in a
zero it is a pointer to a block on the
Heap all words to end in zero in O
program are always valid pointers to
live to blocks on the Heap um and
anything that ends in a one it knows
it's an immediate and it doesn't need to
track for the purposes of garbage
collection so this uniform
representation uh makes it easier to
implement the runtime the garbage
collector um it's also really useful for
the uh implementation of polymorphism
for a fast separate compilation of
polymorphic functions so uh probably
everybody knows what polymorphism is uh
this is also what's called generics and
languages like Java and C++ um but let's
let's talk about another nice feature of
okl which is polymorphism um so okl has
a nice excuse me expressive St type
system with type inference so here's a
function an okayl function the map
function it's one of the most common
functions it takes a list l and a
function f and it applies the function f
to every element of the list producing a
new list uh so this is a this is a very
simple function and the details of it
implementation don't matter that much
for this talk but one thing that's cool
about it is that it has this type and
okl could automatically figure out this
type for you so this type says that map
takes a tick a list and a function from
tick a to tick B and returns a tick b
list and this tick a and tick B these
are type variables they stand in for any
type kind of like a generic variable in
Java or C++ and uh ok doesn't need any
help you didn't have to write any
annotations on your function map in
order for it to figure out that it can
get this very generic type in some sense
the most General type possible for this
Bap function um so uh because we have
nice type inference and conf figure out
these very generic types polymorphism is
simple and pervasive in O camel uh but
coming back to our uniform
representation of values how do you
implement polymorphism um it's not
actually obvious how to do that in most
programming languages if if the data in
okel had different shapes if sometimes
it was multiple words wide and sometimes
it had to be passed in different
registers it would be hard to take a
function like map and compile it to one
assembly code implementation because how
does that assembly code call the
function f it doesn't know whether uh
the data should be passed in a general
purpose register or floating Point
register how many how many words wide it
is so because uh because we have this
nice uniform representation values we
can compile poly functions really easily
because it doesn't matter what type they
operate on that type is always one
word um so we can compile every
polymorphic function just once and and
rely on this uniform representation of
values which which makes compilation
fast and easy of course other languages
have other approaches to features like
polymorphis or generics um in C++ uh to
a first approximation the compiler makes
one copy of your function per type so
the compiler does a little static
analysis to see all the different types
that you use a generic function at and
it'll make a copy for each of those
different types and this has some
advantages and disadvantages relative to
the okl approach um for example uh you
know C++ might be able to optimize these
functions a little bit more because it's
Building A specialized copy for each
individual type uh but on the downside
uh there are many copies of the
functions now and this means your
binaries are going to be bigger and also
there's more pressure on the instruction
cache so you might call map several
different times in your program and even
if you call it one right after the other
um it might not be in the cast because
it's actually a different copy of map
that we now have to go
fetch um and in C and other languages uh
they approach polymorphism with compile
time or runtime code generation so this
is a jit right uh basically in C the
your program when you call a function um
on on a type the the the actual language
runtime goes and checks to see if you
have an implementation of the function
for that type yet and if not it'll
compile it right then for you it'll sort
of pause the execution program compile
the function and then then you can use
that function this is called Just in
Time compilation also a valid
approach okay so uh changing gears a
little bit I want to talk about one
other feature of oaml before we talk
about ways it could be
better and that is that oaml has
parallelism which sounds like a boring
thing because uh most programming
languages support parallelism but uh in
oel this is actually kind of a new
innovation before okel 5 which only came
out a few years ago Oka had no support
for shared memory parallel programming
which made it really very far behind the
times in terms of modern programming
language
implementations but oaml 5 did come out
and it does have support for for for
multicore uh parallel programming um
with shared memory which is is tricky in
a language in a memory managed language
like OK because you need to build a
garbage collector and a runtime that can
deal with the fact that you have
multiple threads executing concurrently
and touching the same shared
Heap uh and although oaml was late to
this party I think being late um meant
that we could uh or the okam community
could do a really good job at
implementing parallelism and building a
parallel runtime so in particular okam
has a sane memory model what do I mean
by
that um languages like uh C++ for
example in the presence of data Races
they have what you might call uh Halt
and Catch Fire semantics um in the in
the presence of a data race all bets are
off anything could happen you know your
computer can explode and okay this
sounds ridiculous probably your computer
is not going to actually explode but you
can see really really surprising
behaviors in your program you might
think that if you have a data race uh
okay well once the data race happens
values might be corrupted but um but
before that you know everything is fine
that's not the case in C++ you can
actually see corrupted values before you
reach the point in the program where you
seem to have a data race and also uh
data races are not bounded in Space by
which I mean uh you might think you have
a data race on some variables and
therefore their values can be corrupted
uh and anything they flow to can be
corrupted but other values are going to
be fine and that's also not the case C++
if you have a data race values that
appear to be totally unrelated from the
data race in your program um uh can be
have arbitrarily corrupted values sorry
and I should have said a data Ras of
course is when you have multiple threads
that access the same memory and at least
one of them is modifying
it um in oaml we have this really cool
property that data races are bounded in
space and time uh and uh that's you know
so when you do have a data Ras in your
program uh it only affects the variables
that are involved in the data rase and
only happens at times that seem like
they're logically consistent with the
program that you've written and this
means that debugging data races is much
easier um I'm sure most of you have
written parallel programs and you know
that it is basically impossible for
humans to write data Race Free programs
without substantial machine support this
is really hard to do uh and and that's
compounded by the fact that they have
these weird behaviors it makes them
really hard to debug it's a lot like
debugging a memory corruption bug um you
know the the the consequences of this
data race are just so far uh removed
from the logical place where it appears
in your program that it can be really
hard to track down so this this the fact
that data races are bounded in space and
time is a real advantage to O's
parallelism
implementation uh but it's not perfect
um you may know that in Rust for example
uh there's a race-free programming model
so if you uh if you write your program
in the safe fragment of rust then the
language makes a guarantee that it will
have no data races the the type syst of
rust guards against that and that's
that's not the case in okam we do not
have uh at least an okam 5 out of the
box a race free programming
model Okay
so we've talked about uh some some facts
about how a camel works and I want to
call your attention to like two aspects
of that that are less than ideal uh
which are probably obvious
so I talked about how great it is to
have a uniform representation of values
and how this makes it easy to implement
polymorphism and to implement the
garbage collector but it does mean you
have very limited control over like the
layout of your memory and of your of
your of your program's data so um if
you're uh writing a really high
performance application where that can
be important this can be a problem so
just to give you some examples of how
bad it can be a no camel um it's very
hard to keep data compact remember I
said everything is a wordwide so that
means if I have eight bits of data it's
we just pack it into those 63 bits at
the beginning of an immediate and stick
a one at the end so your so your eight
bits your bite takes a whole word um and
it gets worse how about an N64 so I said
that if your type fits in 63 bits we can
represent it as an immediate it and
otherwise we have to represent it as a
pointer to a block that's allocated on
the Heap right and an N64 doesn't fit in
63 bits nor does a itol float so uh
those things we have to actually every
N64 we have to represent as a block on
the Heap that's allocated and this means
they take you know you have to have the
header word and then it turns out in the
particular case of N64 there's a
additional word called the custom word
which doesn't matter and then the actual
data which means N64 is no camel are a
three-word allocated block on the Heap
okay this is not great for writing high
performance software
um so uh in addition to the fact that
they're this makes data big all these
pointers mean that the the prefetcher is
defeated if you have an array of of a
type that's not an immediate you have an
array of pointers and that means their
data is sort of all spread out over the
Heap and you're not going to get good
cache locality which is really important
in hyperv
pram and it also means that the garbage
collector has to manage everything it
has to manage every N64 and that
increases the amount of work the garbage
collector has to do and okel has a has a
very performant gar garbage collector um
we write lots of extremely performance
software at Jan street that allocates
Lots uh but uh but it would be better if
we could let it do less work by not like
making it manage every
N64 um and as we talked about unsafe
parallelism is no fun uh even even with
a good memory model you are going to
write data races and those data races
are almost always bugs uh and so it
would be better if we had a way to to
statically rule them out also the good
memory model does cost something so the
way that we achieve data races being
bowed in space and time is by adding a
little bit of extra synchronization in
in the runtime the the part of ampell
that manages parallel uh
processes uh and these synchronization
steps are pretty cheap they did a lot of
measurement and they they arrived at a
really performant parallel runtime but
they do cost a little bit and if we uh
could statically rule out data races
then we wouldn't need those additional
checks okay so um so we'd like to fix
those things about o camel uh and we are
working on that at Chain Street it's
loads of
fun so I want to tell you about sort of
our design goals as we add features to
oaml to try to try to improve the
situation um we are trying to give our
programmers safe convenient and
predictable control over the performance
critical aspects of their program and I
want to talk about each of those a
little bit so by safe I mean the kind of
safety that oel has always had oel is
type safe and memory safe if your
program type checks it is guaranteed not
to seg vault at runtime and it's
guaranteed that uh it won't have a type
error at runtime and this is a really
nice property that makes it easier to
write o programs and easier to review
them and make sure they're correct which
is really important you know in a
financial setting as you all
know um and so we want to give people
more control over their programs
Behavior performance-wise but we don't
want to give up the safety also these
features should be convenient um uh oaml
is a highlevel declarative programming
language that makes it easy to write
software quickly and we'd like these
features to to have that character
too and finally predictable so I'm not
going to talk today about compiler
optimizations um this is something we do
work on we have a team working on uh
compiler optimizations and they do great
great stuff but a problem with relying
on the compiler to make your program
faster for you is that it's it's very
hard to predict uh whether that's going
to happen or not um compiler
optimizations are often based on heris
or they sort of pattern match on the
exact struct structure of your program
and this means that if you introduce
small changes to your program all of a
sudden the compiler optimization might
start happening or stop happening and
it's just very hard if you really care
about the exact performance you're
getting um to guarantee that uh these
optimizations are giving you what you
need so uh rather than relying on the
compiler to make your program faster
what we want to do is give you the power
to express the performance behavior that
you desired out of the compiler and
guarantee statically that that's what
you're going to
get uh and also only where you need it
so uh there are there are some people at
Jam street that write uh software that
is needs to be as performant as you
could possibly imagine but actually the
vast majority of Jan Street developers
are just writing normal software that
whose performance we want to be good but
doesn't you know need to be measured in
nanc and we want to make sure that as
we're adding these features to the
language we're not um we're not making
those users pay for it we shouldn't be
adding complexity that everybody has to
see these features should only uh should
only cost you something if you use them
in terms of
complexity um and we're doing this in O
camel uh we think we benefit as Mark
said a lot from the open source
Community uh we're not like forking the
language we're we're just building new
okel features that we hope to to put
into main Upstream okam later and uh we
want to make sure that um we can
continue to use public open source OK
libraries and that we can continue to re
release our libraries for other people
to use so our extensions need to be
backwards compatible with uh Mainline
Upstream o camel
so those are our design goals okay so
now finally uh a solid what probably 20
22 minutes in I will I will start
talking about some of the new things
that we're adding to oaml um so there's
three major features that I'm going to
talk about today um one of them is
narrow and flat data layouts to solve
that problem of giving users control
over the the memory of their program uh
another is support for stack allocation
so that we can rely on the garbage
collector a little bit less for data
that does need to be allocated
um and finally we'll talk about
race-free parallel
programming so uh we're doing this you
know as I said uh in O camel and
preserving type safety and to do that
we're using two sort of fancy is
features from the type system literature
um fancy features I should say uh so
these features are called kinds and
modes and if you have never encountered
those words in a programming languages
context don't worry I will explain them
as as we
go um okay so uh let's start with narrow
and flat data layouts or unbox types
this part's pretty simple um I mean the
goal here hopefully is pretty clear we
just like to add new types to oaml that
have different representations than the
classic uniform representation that we
talked about so we like to add types
like these in32 hash int 8 hash float
hash and I'll pronounce these unboxed
in32 unboxed int 8 unboxed float um so
these should just be the bits that you
asked for not uh not like packed into 63
bits and then have have a one added at
the end and and unbox 1032 should just
be should just be 32
bits uh and we'd like to somehow add
these these types to oaml so that you
can do all the normal things you do with
oaml types with them so you should be
able to put them in records This Record
has an unboxed 8 and an unboxed n32 so
maybe it even fits in one word because
uh it only needs 48 bits uh 4 bits I can
count um uh and and in addition to that
maybe we can have even fancier kinds of
unboxed types so how about an unboxed
record so this thing with a hash uh
brace at the front is an unboxed record
what do I mean by that so a normal
record like the one before um as we
talked about is going to be represented
as a pointer to the Heap containing
these values right an unbox record is
different an unbox record is kind of a
fiction for the programmer the
programmer gets to manipulate it as if
it's one thing and they can project from
it and update it um but under the hood
it's represented by just passing around
the contents of the record individually
so when you pass one of these two a
function it probably gets passed in two
registers one holding the inate and one
holding the the int list rather than uh
rather than uh a pointer to a block on
the
Heap uh and you know even more
complicated layouts like we'd like to
have an array of unboxed records so as
we talked about in oaml if you have an
array uh of data that doesn't fit in 63
bits that's always an array of pointers
um but maybe we can have an array of
unboxed records like this so we just
have like the int 8 and the in32 laid
out next to each other in memory
repeatedly like you would see in any
normal San programming language so
um the goal is to add these types to the
language uh but there's an obvious
problem which is that I explained at
Great length how we depend on ok's
uniform representation of values in
order to implement things like the
garbage collector and uh and
polymorphism so what are we going to do
about that uh and the answer is we're
going to add a way for the type system
Bo camel to track the shape of your of
your type and use that information to
help the garbage collector and to
compile polymorphism and we call those
shapes
layouts um and layouts are a particular
form of kind from the type systems
literature so kinds uh you can think of
as being like types of types so um in a
normal programming language types
classify values right your different
values each has a each different value
has a type uh and so kinds are like that
but for types each type has a kind and
that kind in our case is a layout it
classifies the shape of the type
um so uh we're going to use these
layouts so the type system can track
them and then the compiler can use them
to know how to manipulate data
appropriately so uh what kind of layouts
are there well uh we have a lattice of
layouts technically it's a join semi
lattice but um hopefully nobody will
call me on that uh so if we start at the
bottom left there value is the layout of
classic ampell values so every type that
existed in ell before we added unbox
types that's going to have the kind
value uh bits8 is going to be the kind
of types that fit in eight bits and bit
64 is going to be the kind of types that
fit in 64 bits um and we also have float
64 because bit 64s are passed in general
purpose registers but float 64s are
passed in floating pointer simd
registers and we can even have a kind
like void uh void is the kind of types
that don't have any representation at
runtime okl has a fancy type system
sometimes you pass around values to
functions just for type
uh and we can now give those layout void
uh and just erase them at
runtime um so there's also this layout
at the top called any which is a weird
one so any um is the layout of a type
where the type system hasn't figured out
what its layout is uh and this this is
hard to use because if you have a type
whose layout is any the compiler doesn't
know how to compile a program using that
type uh it just rejects it but it can
still be really useful in signatures um
you might imagine that we have a
signature for like types that we know
how to print so it's a signature that
has a function at like T Arrow string or
something like that and the point is um
that signature makes sense for NE
regardless of its layout uh and so we
might want to write down that signature
once using the layout any now any
individual implementation of that
signature for a given type will
specialize the signature to to a given
layout um but the signature itself can
be shared across all layouts by using
the layout
any uh and we're also going to add
aggregate layouts uh so so uh here's the
layout of an unboxed record containing
uh four things one of which doesn't
actually need a representation at
runtime so maybe it's three things um uh
and yeah product layouts like
that okay so uh so so how does this work
in practice in the type system well the
type system just keeps track of the
layout of the types and uh we have to
talk about how to implement the GC and
how to implement polymorphism briefly so
uh how do we Implement polymorph M well
we do what other programming languages
do uh we just have to make a copy of
your function for each different layout
that you use it at uh and this is still
I would say better than what C++ does
C++ is going to make a copy per type
approximately uh we only have to make
one copy per layout so per like class of
types which is going to be a lot better
and as for the GC we just have to teach
it some new tricks so for example if you
make a record containing some types that
are uh classical C values and some types
that are boxed we're now going to uh
modify that header word that I talked
about that records have uh to record
which values the GC is supposed to look
at and which values the GC is not
supposed to look at and that's how it
knows which values to look at and and
won't ever look at a value that ends in
a zero but is not a
pointer that's unbox
types um so that's the first of the
three features that I'm going to talk
about today the second is stack
allocation I have more to say about
stack allocation uh although we'll see
how we do on
time so um Heap allocation versus stat
allocation so oel is a garbage collected
language and like most garbage collected
languages um all the data that it
allocates it allocates on the Heap uh
and uh Heap allocation is uh expensive
uh relatively speaking I mean as I said
earlier okel is very good at this and we
have a very performant garbage collector
but it does cost something oaml has
what's called a generational garbage
collector so there's a quote unquote
minor Heap where small and short-lived
values live uh and a major Heap where uh
where big or long lived values live and
uh managing memory on the major Heap in
particular does really have an
expense um the minor Heap is better the
minor Heap is basically just a a bump
allocator so there's just a big slab of
memory and every time you allocate
something on the minor Heap we increment
the pointer to make some space for it
and that's very cheap but it's still
cash inefficient so um there's a real
trade-off when you think about how big
your minor Heap should be every time the
minor Heap fills up we have to do
garbage collection and like check which
values on the Heap are live and move
them to the major Heap and free up the
memory and that cost something so we
want the minor Heap to be big so that we
don't have to do that very often but
also if the minor Heap is Big it doesn't
fit in the cash and so we have bad cach
locality so there's just a trade-off
here and there's no good
answer um so stack allocation can be
better stack allocation in the sense
you're all familiar with from C or or or
whatever your favorite programming
language is um it's kind of similar to
minor Heap allocation and that there's
just a pointer that gets bumped right um
but collection happens much more cheaply
because you know in C when your function
returns we just decrement the stack
pointer you don't have to scan the
values uh you're supposed to make sure
they don't live past the lifetime of
your function uh and and so we can just
decrement the the stack pointer we don't
have to do any
scanning also in general this will touch
fewer cach lines than the minor Heap um
because we're reusing the same memory
every time you call and return from a
function uh so we'd like to add stack
allocation to O camel but there's a
problem which is that we said we're
trying to keep o camel safe right and
stack allocation is not uh obviously
safe
um uh in order to make it safe we need
to follow a stack discipline so like uh
turning back to our example of C there's
a classic kind of bug and C where you
allocate something on the stack and then
you store a pointer to it somewhere uh
and you kind of forget that it was
allocated on the stack and now your
function returns but that pointer is
still stored somewhere and if you look
at it later well that data is now some
other memory entirely it's representing
some other value this is a classic kind
of use after free buug we want to make
sure you you can't have that kind of bug
and Oak camel
somehow um so what do you need to know
about a value to know that it respects
the stack discipline well mainly you
have to not do that thing I just said we
should only stack allocate values if we
never create pointers to them from the
Heap because the Heap lives for an
indefinite amount of time and stack
allocated values are only going to live
for lifetime of one function so if you
create a point or two value on the Heap
we don't stack allocate that value also
if you return a value from your function
we shouldn't stack allocated because
when you return from your function we're
going to pop the stack frame right so
that memory immediately goes out of
scope uh it's lifetime end and then we
shouldn't uh and we shouldn't uh let it
live past the end of this
function okay so we need to add some
features to the type system to track
these properties Valu so that we can
figure out what can be stack allocated
and what can't be stack
allocated uh before uh I talk about what
those features are uh I should explain
why we don't just do what rust does so
uh probably some of you know rust and
rust is a great language uh no
complaints about rust um so why don't we
use well sorry I guess I'm about to get
to some complaints about rust so I just
lied uh why don't we use RTI lifetimes
uh well lifetimes are are comp so sorry
I to say what lifetimes are rust is a is
a manually managed language um and the
way it works in Rust is that every value
gets associated with a lifetime that is
like how long that data lives and these
lifetimes can be arbitrarily complex
tracking the lifetime of something
across many function calls and and like
boundaries that don't correspond to the
lexical scope of the program at all uh
and and this lets it uh you know free
memory when it's when it's exactly when
it's dead rather than doing a collection
step to figure out what's dead
later um so but lifetimes are
complicated so in Rust um the way stack
allocation works is that functions take
a parameter which is the lifetime of
that function um and uh if your value
that you allocate during the function
can have that same lifetime that the
function does itself if it's polymorphic
in the lifetime then uh that value can
be allocated On The Stack and this
sounds prettyy simple and
straightforward but there's a bunch of
problems with it uh the first thing is
you often trip into the need for what's
called higher order polymorphism so rust
has higher order functions that is
functions that take functions as
arguments and so now there's like
multiple lifetime parameters right the
fun this function has a lifetime
parameter and those functions that it
takes as arguments also have lifetime
parameters and it turns out that in the
presence of this kind of polymorphism
type inference is undecidable uh so
there's no way to write a type inference
Engine That Could automatically figure
out for you left times in your rust
program it's inevitable that sometimes
the user will have to add lifetime
annotations and as we talked about at
the beginning we're trying to preserve
this character of oo having nice type
inference and it being easy to use our
fancy features so that doesn't fit in
well uh also these lifetimes get very
complicated and and they need to get
complicated and rust because every every
you allocate we need to understand its
lifetime exactly but in O camel we have
a garbage collector so if something has
a complicated lifetime we can just
decide to allocate it on the Heap and
let the garbage collector clean it up
when it notices it's dead we don't have
to figure out how to give it a
complicated lifetime that tracks that
exact period of
time uh so with those things in mind
what we're using is modes so um modes
are another fancy system fancy thing
from the from type systems literature
and uh the way we're using modes in our
version of oaml is that they're
properties that can be applied to any
type so earlier I talked about kinds
kinds kind of divide the universe of
types into different buckets by their
shape in our case right modes are
different modes are orthogonal to types
so it makes sense to talk about any a
value of any type at any mode uh and
we're going to use these modes to track
properties like whether something lives
uh past the lifetime of the function
that it's allocated in uh and in our
case these properties are are going to
be deep properties so if you have a
deeply nested record um with a bunch of
pointers in it and we say that it has a
certain mode we're talking about the
whole the whole value all the way
down um so to support stack allocation
we add two modes Global and local uh
Global is the default mode this is the
sort of legacy mode for classic camel
values and it means that the lifetime of
something uh that has Mode Global is
unconstrained uh we make no guarantees
about how long it
lives on the other hand if something has
the local mode then uh we guarantee that
it follows the stack discipline so
something can only be assigned the local
mode if it's not like stored on the Heap
we don't create any pointers to it uh or
return it from a function and the idea
is that we're going to have the type
system automatically figure out for you
whether something has the local mode by
tracking how you use values that you
create also there's a subm moding
relationship so uh you can think about
it this way if something has the local
mode you're constrained in how you can
use it you're not allowed to store it on
the Heap or return it from a function
right so if you have something at the
global mode it's perfectly safe to treat
it as if it were at the local mode
because all you're doing is taking away
your ability to like store it somewhere
um so so we can can set up the language
so that um anywhere something of the
local mode is expected it's safe to use
something of the global mode which uh
makes programming with this feature a
little bit
easier okay so let's have an example
here's our trusty map function I have
not changed it um but we can give it a
fancier type now so uh this type has two
lines on the first line uh I've written
uh the the classic type it has in
standard okamo like we talked about
earlier and I've written a second line
with ATS and the second line records the
modes of each of the arguments to this
function and here dot means the legacy
mode I'm not making any promises about
how this function interacts uh with the
lifetime of this argument is with
respect to this function but the local
mode means that the function map
respects the stack discipline with
respect to the function argument in
particular it doesn't let the function
argument Escape uh from your call to
map um so uh what that means and by the
way that's true you look at map right
map calls F but it doesn't like squirrel
F away on the Heap somewhere or return
or return f it just it just calls
it um so uh then uh we can write a
function like multiply by so multiply by
uh takes a list l and a number Mt and it
just multiplies uh every element of the
list by
Mt now it does that by creating a little
Anonymous function that just multiplies
the number of Mind bolts and a thing
about oaml is that we have to create a
closure for this function we have to
allocate somewhere the data for this
this function object itself um and uh
where are we going to do that well uh In
classical camel you would allocate it on
the Heap but because we can see that map
uses uh this function in a way that is
consistent with a stack discipline we
can allocate it instead on the stack uh
and this means the garbage collector
doesn't have to get involved here at all
and it's automatically freed when
multiply by
returns okay um I'm going to skip some
parts of this uh this section because I
want to make sure I have time to talk
about data Ras Freedom so I'm going to
skip this slide but I do want to talk
about this slide because I think it's
really cool um so uh a thing that we
learned about local is that it's not
just good for stack allocation this
property of whether something escapes
its scope is a useful property you might
want to track just for safety or
correctness reasons so uh this function
with file is a function from the okl
standard library and the idea is you
pass it a string which is a file name
and then some fun function that you want
to run on the contents of that file so
that function receives an in channel. T
and then it does something it computes
something tick a and your whole function
returns that thing
Tok and the reason you would write a
file manipulation function like this is
that it can automatically manage the
opening and closing of that channel for
you of this file
handle um so with file will open a
handled a file handle and then uh run
your function using it and then it
closes the the file for you
automatically when your function returns
this is nice because it means you won't
forget to close the the file handle if
you use with file um but that would
actually be incorrect if F uh if if the
function we passed to with file stored
the file handle somewhere if it like put
it on the Heap or something um then with
file is going to close the file and now
later somebody may look at this file
handle on the Heap and thinks think it
refers to a valid file that's still open
uh and that would be a bug in your
program and we can use local in a way
that has nothing to do with stack
allocation uh to require that you pass
with file a function that respects the
stack discipline with respect to this
this channel this file handle um so by
giving with file this type we guarantee
that the function you pass it won't like
take that channel and store it away
somewhere because that function has to
uh has to not let it Escape has to
respect the stack
discipline uh so this is really cool we
didn't uh see this coming uh uh
originally but this this feature of
being able to track um whether something
respects the stack discipline or whether
something escapes its scope uh allows us
to provide a little extra safety in
classical camel functions like with
file okay um uh we should have mode
polymorphism I'm going to skip some
things here because uh we have finite
time okay um and I want to talk about
data Ras Freedom so I want to argue that
modes which are the technology we just
finished talking about are a great fit
for data race Freedom so uh here are
some things you might do to value that
you might want to track whether your
program does these things or not you
might want to make an alias to it return
it from a function create a pointer to
it pass it to another thread these are
all pro these are all like things you
can do uh in your program and if we can
track whether you can do things like
this then we can maybe provide a way to
provide a static guarantee of data Ras
Freedom um so uh in our previous example
we talked about local and local is a
mode that tracks uh that tracks whether
you do something to Val value the thing
that it tracks is whether you let it
Escape its scope um and uh we can add
new modes that track things like this
and then uh as it turns out we can put
them together to guarantee data race
Freedom uh and these operations are all
deep so they fit into the they fit into
this category of modes that we were
talking
about so uh what modes are we going to
have I'm going to introduce two new
dimensions of modes the first one is
contention so uh contention tracks
whether a value has been shared across
threads uh a value can be uncontended
which means it's local to one thread or
it can be contended which means it has
been shared with another thread um and
we can use the type system to enforce
that uh values that have been shared to
other threads values that are contended
uh you're not allowed to read or write
to the mutable parts of them and this is
going to give us a guarantee of database
Freedom right this enforces that uh if
you share a value to another thread uh
you're not allowed to mutate it and so
you can't possibly have a data race
okay um of course we do want to provide
some way to mutate shared memory and
I'll get to that in a
second first I need to introduce a
second mode dition portability uh so
contention was whether a value has been
shared portability is whether a value
may be shared uh it's a slightly
different angle on the same kind of
question so values can be portable or
non-portable uh portable values are safe
to share uh and non-port values
non-portable values are not safe to
share so what values are portable you're
probably thinking okay so mutable data
is not going to be portable that's not
quite right actually mutable data can be
portable almost everything can be
portable the trick here is that we
already have contention so we're already
preventing you from doing anything
unsafe by sharing meetable data across
threads but there's a loophole in that
plan and that loophole is functions um
imagine that I create a function in one
thread that mutates some data in that
thread and then I pass that function
itself to another thread um that
function is not mutable but I'm sort of
passing the capability to mutate data in
the original thread uh by passing this
function so I need to ban that I need to
ban the ability to pass functions that
do mutation to other threads and the way
I do that is by saying that functions
that capture uh uncontended mutable
state that is mutable state that they
have the power to mutate um cannot be
sent to other threads those functions
are not portable and we can build a type
system that tracks its property of
functions
um oh I I meant to reorganize my slides
because the next slide is a doozy but I
guess I forgot so I will go into it um
actually we have a whole bunch of modes
uh here's here's a best J of modes uh uh
so
um uh we uh we have five modes with more
four no we have five modal axes with
more coming um and these modal axes it
turns out can be nicely categorized by
uh the distinction that I talked about
between portability and contention which
is whether they're about what has
happened to data in the past or whether
they're about what you're allowed to do
with data in the future so locality
which we already talked about is a
future mode it's like portability
locality is about whether you are
allowed to let a value escape from its
scope right we've already talked about
portability attention it turns out we're
going to have two other modes too
uniqueness and linearity or two other
modal axes I should say so uniqueness is
about whether you have created an alias
to value and linearity is about whether
you are allowed to create an alias to
Value um
and here on this chart I've I've uh I've
indicated a bunch of things the mode
that is in bold that's the like Legacy
one the classic o camel data gets to
have and also there's a minimum and a
maximum because as we talked about
there's sub booting here there's always
it's always safe to promote values in
One Direction along these modal axes uh
I won't I won't bore you with the
details of going through all these
different things I'm happy to talk about
it more later but the point is we can
track lots of properties using uh using
modes and we can put that together to
enforce data Ras freedom
so let's come back to data race freedom
and let's do that by looking at some
examples of uh of uh what functions
might what API we might give to
functions using these modes so um how
can you spawn a thread well uh we can
give spawn this type so the main point
is that the function that you're going
to send to another thread needs to be
portable uh supp portable functions are
the ones that are safe to send other
threads the ones that don't capture and
mutate data so the spawn function simply
requires that its argument is portable
problem
solved um and uh we can also have join
now you might so join like uh waits for
a thread to finish and then that thread
returns some value and that it brings
that value back to the original thread
you might expect that join result needs
to be contended because it's moving
across threads uh but actually it
doesn't need to be contended because uh
when join Returns the thread that you're
joining has finished running so there no
longer another thread that has access to
this data so we don't need to track it
as
contended um uh so okay uh here's the
most complicated slide in the talk well
I guess the the slide with the table is
the most complicated but this is the
most complicated one I'm actually going
to try to explain um uh so this is like
an API for safe parallelism using actual
shared memory so uh and I'm going to go
through it in a little bit of detail but
um the idea here is everything I've just
talked about portability and contention
what they do is they set things up so
that there's no way to share memory
between threads and have that memory be
mutable right but actually that's
something you want to do we want to
provide some apis that allow you to do
that in a safe way so this is example
this is an example of one such API that
uses locks uh we they don't all have to
use locks but this is one API that that
does use locks to share memory in a safe
way between the threads so I I'm going
to have to go at a kind of high level
here because I don't have enough room on
the slide for all the details but the
idea is that this type uh this type t
here that's a type that represents a
pointer to immutable data and uh the
tick a argument to T that's the type of
data that's stored at this pointer and
the tick K argument uh is a trick that
we sometimes use in oel type system it's
what you might call a phantom type but
basically that tick K identifies the
lock that is associated with this
pointer so uh I haven't shown you the
the module that has locks in it but that
TK is going to link this pointer to a
data type from that
module so then if we look at create um
create is how we create a new shared
memory cell that is protected by lock
and we know what lock is protected by
because it returns uh a a type or a t
that has a K in it so you're going to
need to have the key to this lock and
that shows up on the next on the next
function which is map
so um map uh allows you to take a
function and apply it to some data
that's in one of these shared memory
cells so in order to do that you need to
have the key for the lock
uh that uh that is associated with this
this tick k um and we're going to set
the system up so that keys are not
portable you're not allowed to send them
across threads so if you succeed in
locking the lock and getting the key um
then you know you're the only person
that can access the shared memory right
now uh and uh you're allowed to do
things like map so map requires you to
have the key and uh and requires you to
give it a portable function that's going
to run conceptually on this other piece
of shared memory that might belong to
another thread uh and then you get back
uh a piece of shared memory that has
been updated uh so it takes a type a
function from type tick a to tick B and
it updates the value that's pointed to
to be a tick
B um uh okay uh this API as you can see
goes on further but uh and I'm happy to
talk about it more but I'm not gonna I'm
not going to go through the whole thing
in this
talk um okay so I think that's uh all
the all the type Theory I have to show
you today and I've uh just about
finished on time so so just quickly to
summarize some of this um uh how is it
going some of so I should say uh some of
this is more conceptual than other bits
there's some Jan streeters in the
audience and I'm sure that they're like
oh I don't remember seeing that before
uh um so uh stack allocation unbox types
are being used uh in production systems
in fact I'm here in Hong Kong this week
I don't live here but I'm here to help
one of the teams here use unbox types in
the system and it's been it's been
really fun um it's going okay
uh uh there's there's lots more to do
though uh these features you know uh one
of the nice things about working on a
compiler in a setting like jamr is that
we can add features that aren't quite
fully fleshed out yet so there's lots
more work to do to make these features
feel totally complete with respect to
what you would expect to see in oaml uh
but they are now usable and being used
by
teams uh this slide is a little bit out
of date I would say the data race
Freedom implementation is finished but
we're still in the initial stages of
rolling it out so we're working with
some individual teams to have them sort
of beta test for us this API for data
race freedom and we think that um uh at
the moment nobody inside Jan street is
allowed to write uh parallel
applications in oaml because we don't
have a way to give them a guarantee of
data race freedom but very soon we're
going to turn that switch and it'll be
the case that people can write parallel
applications and every parallel
application will get this guarantee
statically and we're very excited about
that um how's it going uh I think it's
going well uh this stuff fits into OK
pretty well well um I can talk about
some of this uh in more detail later if
you're interested but um uh I think you
know there are people that have writing
very high performance software in okl
for a long time at Jane Street and I
think they report that these features
make their lives much easier they don't
have to do as as many crazy hacks or
rely on like external function calls
things like that they can write things
that feel much more idiomatic by using
the features that I've talked about um
the the pay you go bit where we don't
want other people to have to pay for the
complexity here seems to be working
we're pretty nervous about this as I
mentioned we're in the process of
rolling out data race Freedom which
means we're like in the process of
annotating all of our standard libraries
with those portability and contention
modes and uh you know I think we are a
little bit worried about the complexity
uh but so far so
good uh and if you want to know more uh
we have a YouTube series we have blogs
uh we have academic papers I'm very
proud of the data race Freedom Al the
mode paper which won on award at poo one
of the top uh uh top programming
language conferences this year um and I
think that's all I have so I'm I'm happy
to take questions